>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 17:
PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP
NAMES HIS BUDGET DIRECTOR AND
WRAPS UP HIS POST-ELECTION
TOUR; SYRIAN CIVILIANS STRUGGLE
TO ESCAPE ALEPPO; AND, IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, A SURGE OF
AMERICAN TOURISTS TO CUBA AND
THE SCRAMBLE TO ACCOMMODATE
THEM.
>> Reporter: HOW BUSY ARE YOU?
>> WE ARE FULL ALMOST THE WHOLE
YEAR.
>> Reporter: SO, YOU GET
FINANCIAL SECURITY?
>> YES.
I'M ALSO LEARNING HOW TO BE A
BUSINESSWOMAN.
>> Stewart: NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TODAY, PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD
TRUMP FINISHED HIS SO-CALLED
"THANK YOU" TOUR OF SOME OF THE
30 STATES HE CARRIED IN LAST
MONTH'S ELECTION TO WIN HIS
ELECTORAL COLLEGE MAJORITY.
THIS AFTERNOON, HE APPEARED IN
MOBILE, ALABAMA, A STATE WHERE
HE WON 63% OF THE VOTE.
LAST NIGHT, MR. TRUMP TOLD A
CROWD OF 11,000 SUPPORTERS IN
ORLANDO, FLORIDA, AS COMMANDER-
IN-CHIEF, HE'LL DEPLOY THE U.S.
MILITARY SPARINGLY, THOUGH NOT
WHEN IT COMES TO THE ISLAMIC
STATE IN IRAQ AND SYRIA, OR
ISIS.
>> FOR TOO LONG, WE'VE BEEN
MOVING FROM ONE RECKLESS
INTERVENTION TO ANOTHER,
COUNTRIES THAT MOST OF YOU'VE
NEVER EVEN HEARD OF BEFORE.
IT'S CRAZY, AND IT'S GOING TO
STOP.
A TRUMP ADMINISTRATION WILL
FOCUS ON THE VITAL NATIONAL
SECURITY INTERESTS OF THE UNITED
STATES, AND THAT MEANS CRUSHING
ISIS RAPIDLY AND DEFEATING
RADICAL ISLAMIC TERRORISM.
>> Stewart: TODAY, MR. TRUMP
ANNOUNCED HIS PICK FOR FEDERAL
BUDGET DIRECTOR: REPUBLICAN
CONGRESSMAN MICK MULVANEY OF
SOUTH CAROLINA.
AN ALLY OF HOUSE SPEAKER PAUL
RYAN, MULVANEY HAS SERVED IN THE
HOUSE SINCE BEING ELECTED AS
PART OF THE TEA PARTY WAVE IN
2010.
HE ADVOCATES DEEP SPENDING CUTS
AND WAS WILLING TO SHUT DOWN THE
GOVERNMENT OVER RAISING THE
NATION'S DEBT CEILING.
PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP CALLS
CHINA'S CONFISCATION OF AN
AMERICAN UNDERWATER DRONE IN THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA TWO DAYS AGO
"UNPRESIDENTED."
HE SAID ON TWITTER TODAY:
LATER, CHINA SAID IT WILL RETURN
THE DRONE ITS NAVY SEIZED 50
MILES NORTHWEST OF THE
PHILIPPINES' SUBIC BAY, WHERE
THE U.S. ONCE HAD A MILITARY
BASE.
THE PENTAGON SAYS THE RETURN
RESULTS FROM "DIRECT ENGAGEMENT"
WITH BEIJING.
THE U.S. SAYS THE DRONE WAS
CONDUCTING RESEARCH INTO THE
SALINITY, TEMPERATURE AND
CLARITY OF THE SEA.
CHINA OPPOSES THE SURVEYS.
IT'S BEEN BUILDING RUNWAYS AND
INSTALLING MILITARY EQUIPMENT ON
ISLANDS THERE.
FILIPINO PRESIDENT RODRIGO
DUTERTE IS THREATENING TO
TERMINATE AN AGREEMENT THAT
ALLOWS U.S. TROOPS TO CONDUCT
MILITARY EXERCISES IN THE
PHILIPPINES.
THIS WAS IN RESPONSE TO THE
DEFERRAL OF AN AMERICAN AID PACT
DUE TO CONCERNS OVER DUTERTE'S
EXTRAJUDICIAL KILLINGS OF
SEVERAL THOUSAND DRUG SUSPECTS.
DUTERTE ALSO TOLD REPORTERS
TODAY HIS COUNTRY DID NOT NEED
THE AID AND THAT CHINA MIGHT
PROVIDE IT INSTEAD.
>> WE CAN SURVIVE WITHOUT
AMERICAN MONEY.
BUT, YOU KNOW, AMERICA, YOU
MIGHT ALSO BE PUT TO NOTICE.
PREPARE TO LEAVE THE
PHILIPPINES.
>> Stewart: IN SYRIA, THE
EVACUATION OF CIVILIANS FROM THE
BESIEGED CITY OF ALEPPO WAS
MEANT TO RESUME TODAY.
THERE ARE AS MANY AS 4,000
PEOPLE FROM TWO VILLAGES, IN THE
LAST SECTION OF REBEL-HELD
TERRITORY, WHO WERE SEEKING TO
LEAVE.
ONCE SYRIA'S MOST POPULOUS CITY,
IT IS NOW LARGELY IN RUINS AND
WAS RECAPTURED THIS WEEK BY
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD'S
TROOPS.
AS NIGHT FELL ON ALEPPO, THERE
WAS NO SIGN OF THE BUSES NEEDED
TO CARRY OUT THE EVACUATIONS.
FOR MORE ON THE SITUATION, I AM
JOINED BY SKYPE FROM BEIRUT IN
NEIGHBORING LEBANON BY "NEW YORK
TIMES" REPORTER ANNE BARNARD.
ANNE, WHY WAS THERE SUCH
CONFUSION AND SUCH A BREAKDOWN
IN THE EVACUATION OF PEOPLE FROM
EASTERN ALEPPO?
>> WELL, IT'S NOT THE FIRST TIME
A DEAL LIKE THIS HAS BEEN ROCKY
TO IMPLEMENT, AND THAT'S BECAUSE
AS THIS EXTREMELY VIOLENT AND
CHAOTIC WAR GOES ON, EVEN ON
EACH SIDE, THERE'S A LOT OF
FRAGMENTATION.
SO, YOU KNOW, THERE ISN'T ONE
SINGLE LEADERSHIP FOR REBEL
GROUPS, AND INCREASINGLY, THERE
ISN'T ONE SINGLE LEADERSHIP FOR
THE PRO-GOVERNMENT FORCES.
RUSSIA AND TURKEY AGREED TO A
DEAL.
TURKEY IS ONE OF THE MAIN
BACKERS OF THE REBELS, AND
RUSSIA IS THE MOST POWERFUL
BACKER OF THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT,
HAVING BAILED IT OUT WITH AIR
STRIKES AND POLITICAL SUPPORT.
AND, YOU KNOW, AT THE SAME TIME,
THERE ARE OTHER CRUCIAL ALLIES,
LIKE IRAN, WHICH HAS PROVIDED
THOUSANDS OF MILITIA MEMBERS TO
BOLSTER THE GROUND FORCES OF THE
SYRIAN ARMY.
THERE WERE OTHER COMPLICATIONS
WITH THE AL QAEDA-LINKED
AL-NUSRA FRONT.
THEY WERE NOT FULLY COOPERATING
WITH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THAT
PART OF THE DEAL, EITHER, NOT
LETTING THE BUSS IN TO LET
PEOPLE OUT OF THOSE VILLAGES IN
ITALY.
>> Stewart: AND THERE IS AID
TO CIVILIANS AND THE PEOPLE WHO
ARE STILL IN ALEPPO?
ARE THE PEOPLE HELPING THEM
THERE, THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE NOT
BEEN ABLE TO LEAVE?
>> THE THING IS, DURING THE FOUR
YEARS OF THE WAR, WHEN ALEPPO
WAS A DIVIDED CITY, SOME FORM OF
ALTERNATE STRUCTURE SPRANG UP IN
EASTERN REBEL-HELD ALEPPO.
THERE WERE INTERNATIONAL AID
ORGANIZATIONS.
THERE WERE THE LOCAL BRANCH OF
THE SYRIAN-- THERE WERE
N.G.O.s SPONSORED BY SYRIANS
ABROAD AND TURKEY AND OTHERS.
IN THE LAST TWO WEEKS, WHEN THE
REBEL DEFENSES REALLY COLLAPSED
AND THERE WAS PRETTY MUCH MASS
CHAOS ON THAT SIDE OF THE LINE,
A LOT OF PEOPLE WENT TO
WESTERN ALEPPO.
OTHER PEOPLE WHO DIDN'T WANT TO
GO THERE FLED DEEPER INTO THE
REBEL-HELD DISTRICTS, AND THAT
INCLUDED MANY OF THESE REBEL
WORKERS AND AID WORKERS.
ALL THOSE FACILITIES BASICALLY
WERE BOMBED OR DESTROYED OR FELL
INTO CHAOS.
ANF SOME OF THE WORKERS WENT TO
THE OTHER SIDE.
SOME WENT TO REBEL AREAS.
THE WHOLE SYSTEM HAS MORE OR
LESS COLLAPSED SO PEOPLE ARE
REALLY IN THE WORST STATE
THEY'VE BEEN IN.
THERE ARE THOUSANDS OF CIVILIANS
LEFT IN THERE.
THEY'RE WAY WAITING IN RAIN AND
COLD EVERY DAY WAITING FOR THE
BUSES TO COME TO EVACUATE THEM.
>> Stewart: IF WE ALL REMEMBER
BACK TO HOW THIS ALL BEGAN IN
2011 IT REALLY WAS A PROTEST FOR
CIVIL RIGHTS AND FOR GOVERNMENT
REFORM.
IS THERE ANY OF THAT POLITICAL
WILL LEFT, OR IS THAT JUST GONE
BY THE WAYSIDE AND PEOPLE ARE
JUST TRYING TO SURVIVE?
>> WELL, LOOK, THERE ARE
DIFFERENT ISSUES.
I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE WENT
OVER TO THE GOVERNMENT
TERRITORIES BECAUSE THEY JUST
COULDN'T LIVE WITH MORE YEARS OF
BOMBARDMENT.
THEY COULDN'T, YOU KNOW, STAY IN
AN AREA THAT WAS FULL OF
INCREASING DIFFICULTIES WITH
DAILY LIFE.
SOME OF THEM DEFINITELY
EXPRESSED TO US THAT THEY GOT
TIRED.
THE REBELS DID NOT DELIVER WHAT
THEY WERE SUPPOSED TO.
AND SOME PEOPLE EVEN SAID THAT
REBELS PREVENTED THEM FROM
LEAVING.
BUT EVERYBODY, AS I SAID, REBELS
ARE NOT UNITED.
SO IN SOME AREAS THEY SAID
REBELS HELPED THEM LEAVE.
AND ENERGIES THEY SAID THAT
REBELS PREVENTED THEM FROM
LEAVING.
THE POINT IS, I THINK THERE ARE
STILL PEOPLE THERE-- THERE STILL
EXIST MANY SYRIANS WHO BELIEVE
IN THE KINDS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT
REFORMS THAT WERE INITIALLY
ASKED FOR.
THERE'S ALSO MANY SYRIANS THAT
WANTED SOME KIND OF ISLAMIST-
FLAVORED GOVERNMENT.
THAT'S SOMETHING SYRIANS HAVE TO
WORK OUT AMONG THEMSELVES.
THE ISSUE IS I DON'T THINK THERE
IS ANY POLITICAL WILL ON THE
OTHER SIDE, ON THE GOVERNMENT
SIDE, TO MAKE ANY COMPROMISES OR
EVEN DISCUSS COMPROMISES AT THIS
POINT.
THEY FEEL LIKE THEY'RE WINNING
AND THEY DON'T SEE THE NEED TO
CHANGE ANYTHING.
IN FACT, THEY DISPUTE THE VERY
IDEA THAT THIS WHOLE THING
STARTED WITH LEGITIMATE
POLITICAL DEMANDS, AND THEY
PAINT THE ENTIRE UPRISING AS A
FOREIGN-LED CONSPIRACY THAT WAS
EXTREMIST AND ISLAMIST FROM THE
BEGINNING.
>> Stewart: ANNE BARNARD FROM
THE "NEW YORK TIMES," THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: PRESIDENT-ELECT
DONALD TRUMP'S CABINET IS
PREDOMINANTLY WHITE,
PREDOMINANTLY MALE, WITH A NET
WORTH OF $9.5 BILLION.
WHAT WILL THAT MEAN FOR POLICY?
READ MORE ON OUR WEB SITE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: ONE BRIGHT SPOT FOR
DEMOCRATS IN LAST MONTH'S
ELECTIONS WAS WINNING THE
GOVERNORSHIP OF NORTH CAROLINA.
DEMOCRAT ROY COOPER OUSTED
INCUMBENT REPUBLICAN PAT
McCRORY, BUT ONLY AFTER A
RECOUNT CONFIRMED COOPER'S
NARROW VICTORY.
NORTH CAROLINA'S REPUBLICAN-
CONTROLLED STATE LEGISLATURE IS
NOT TAKING THE LOSS LIGHTLY.
YESTERDAY, IT PASSED LAWS
LIMITING THE POWER OF THE
INCOMING GOVERNOR.
ONE STRIPS HIM OF THE POWER TO
APPOINT A MAJORITY OF
COMMISSIONERS TO THE STATE'S
BOARD OF ELECTIONS.
ANOTHER CUTS BY TWO-THIRDS THE
NUMBER OF GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES
THE GOVERNOR CAN APPOINT, FROM
1,500 TO FEWER THAN 500.
HUNDREDS OF PROTESTERS CHANTING
"POWER GRAB" FILLED THE HALLS OF
THE STATE CAPITOL IN RALEIGH
DURING THE LEGISLATIVE SESSIONS
YESTERDAY.
39 OF THEM WERE ARRESTED.
MICHAEL GERHARDT IS A PROFESSOR
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF NORTH
CAROLINA LAW SCHOOL IN CHAPEL
HILL, AND HE JOINS ME NOW TO
DISCUSS THESE DEVELOPMENTS.
PROFESSOR, LET'S START REALLY
BROAD AND THEN WE'LL DRILL DOWN.
WHY DID THIS HAPPEN?
>> WELL, THAT'S A VERY GOOD
QUESTION.
THE LEGISLATURE HAD INITIALLY
CALLED IT A SPECIAL SESSION TO
DEAL WITH DISASTER RELIEF, AND
THEN THEY EXTENDED IT TO
CONSIDER OTHER BILLS.
THERE WAS SOME CONCERN ABOUT
WHERE ELSE THE LEGISLATURE WOULD
GO, AND NOW WE HAVE A SENSE OF
WHERE THEY'VE GONE.
>> Stewart: AND WHY DID THEY
GO THERE?
>> THEY'VE CLAIMED THAT THEY'VE
DONE THIS IN PART BECAUSE THEY
HAVE CONCERNS ABOUT THE
GOVERNORSHIP OF NORTH CAROLINA
BEING TOO POWERFUL A POSITION,
AND SO THEY WANT TO CONSTRAIN
IT.
HISTORICALLY, THOSE OF US WHO
FOLLOW THESE THINGS DON'T THINK
OF THE GOVERNORSHIP OF NORTH
CAROLINA AS BEING A VERY
POWERFUL OFFICE.
IT'S ONE OF THE LAST STATES IN
THE COUNTRY TO GIVE THE
GOVERNORSHIP VETO POWER.
IT'S BEEN A PRETTY WEAK OFFICE
ANYWAY AND IS NOW WEAKER BECAUSE
OF THE LEGISLATURE'S ACTIONS.
>> Stewart: IS THAT WHY SOME
SAID IT WAS A NEEDED REALIGNMENT
OF POWER WHILE OTHER PEOPLE ARE
SAYING IT'S AN OVER-REACH?
>> I THINK THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
IT DEPENDS ON WHERE YOU SIT ON
THAT DIVIDE.
IF YOU AGREE WITH THE OUTCOMES,
YOU WOULD SAY, YES, WE'RE JUST
TRYING TO CONSTRAIN A GOVERNOR
FROM DOING THINGS WE DON'T AGREE
WITH, AND ON THE OTHER SIDE,
SAYING THIS IS TO UNDERMINE AN
INCOMING GOVERNOR, BY LIMITING
THE DISCRETION FURTHER.
>> Stewart: SOME OF THE
CRITICISM IS NOT JUST THAT IT
HAPPENED BUT HOW IT HAPPENED.
HOW DID IT HAPPEN SO QUICKLY?
>> IT HAPPENED VERY FAST BECAUSE
WE HAVE A LEGISLATURE THAT IS
VETO-PROOF.
IT'S GOT SUCH A STRONG CONTROL
BY THE REPUBLICAN PARTY THAT
THAT PARTY'S LEADERS CAN PRETTY
MUCH DO WHATEVER THEY WANT IN
THE LEGISLATURE.
AND THAT'S WHAT WE SAW.
I THINK IN PART THIS HAPPENS,
FRANKLY, BECAUSE I THINK THE
LEGISLATURE BELIEVES IT CAN DO
THIS KIND OF THING AND GET AWAY
WITH IT.
KEEP IN MIND THAT MANY OF THESE
PEOPLE-- IN FACT ALL OF THEM--
WERE JUST RE-ELECTED IN PRETTY
SAFE SEATS.
SO THE MAJORITY AND SUPER-
MAJORITY OF THE STATE
LEGISLATURE FEELS SECURE
POLITICALLY.
>> Stewart: THIS MOVE IS
GETTING NATIONAL ATTENTION AND
EVEN INTERNATIONAL ATTENTION BUT
WHAT I WANT TO KNOW FROM YOU IS
WHAT'S THAT LOCAL ELEMENT OF IT,
THAT NORTH CAROLINIAN ELEMENT,
THAT DOG WHISTLE THAT YOU FOLKS
HEAR THAT MAYBE WE DON'T
NECESSARILY KEY INTO?
>> I THINK THERE ARE A COUPLE OF
THINGS.
ONE IS, OF COURSE, I'M AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA.
WE'RE A PUBLIC UNIVERSITY, AND
WE TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN THAT.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THE
STATE LEGISLATURE DID YESTERDAY
WAS IT RESTRICTED THE GOVERNOR
FROM MAKING ANY APPOINTMENTS TO
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA.
SO THE GOVERNOR-ELECT, ROY
COOPER, HAD MADE PUBLIC
EDUCATION A REAL FOCUS OF HIS
CAMPAIGN.
AND THAT'S JUST ONE OF THE
LIMITATIONS NOW PLACED ON HIM.
SO HIS ABILITY TO INFLUENCE THE
FUTURE DIRECTION OF THE
UNIVERSITY HAS BEEN LIMITED, TO
SOME EXTENT.
AND THEN THERE ARE OTHER AREAS
IN WHICH THE STATE LEGISLATURE
REDESIGNED THINGS.
FOR EXAMPLE, YOU MENTIONED THE
STATE ELECTION SYSTEM, ELECTION
BOARD.
THAT REALIGNMENT IS LIKELY TO
MAKE IT HARDER, IF NOT
IMPOSSIBLE FOR THE CURRENT-- THE
GOVERNOR-ELECT TO BE ABLE TO
INFLUENCE ELECTION BOARDS, WHICH
MEANS THE CURRENT PEOPLE IN
POWER WILL BE ABLE TO MAINTAIN
POWER.
>> Stewart: SOMETHING ELSE
INTERESTING ABOUT NORTH CAROLINA
IS THAT IT'S NOT NECESSARILY
RELIABLY A RED STATE OR A BLUE
STATE IN 2016.
IT'S REALLY QUITE PURPLE AND
WE'VE SEEN THAT WITH A LOT OF
THE NEWS STORIES WE'VE BEEN
COVERING OUT OF NORTH CAROLINA,
FROM L.G.B.T. RIGHTS, TO VOTER
I.D. ISSUES.
WHAT'S GOING ON IN NORTH
CAROLINA THAT YOU THINK IS
IMPORTANT FOR US TO PAY
ATTENTION TO, IN TERMS OF THE
WHOLE COUNTRY?
>> NORTH CAROLINA MAY BE TO SOME
EXTENT A MICROCOSM OF THE
DIVIDE THAT WE SEE ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
THE COUNTRY, OBVIOUSLY, WAS VERY
DIVIDED INSOFAR AS THE LAST
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION WAS
CONCERNED.
AND NORTH CAROLINA, I THINK, IS,
TO SOME EXTENT, A PURPLE STATE
BECAUSE OF THE DIVISIONS.
AND THOSE DIVISIONS ARE NOT JUST
PARTY-WIDE BETWEEN REPUBLICAN
AND DEMOCRAT.
THEY'RE DIVISIONS BETWEEN URBAN
AND RURAL AS WELL.
THERE'S A DIVISION OVER VALUES.
AND WE SEE THOSE DIVISIONS WORK
THEMSELVES OUT WHEN THE
LEGISLATURE ACTS LIKE THIS.
>> Stewart: THE LEGISLATURE
DID... WHAT THEY DID WAS
PERFECTLY LEGAL.
SO I'M WONDERING ABOUT OTHER
STATES THAT HAVE THIS SORT OF
SAME SPLIT WITHIN THE
LEGISLATURE BETWEEN DEMOCRATS
AND REPUBLICANS.
THERE ARE SIX OTHER STATES THAT
HAVE THIS SPLIT.
IS WHAT HAPPENS IN NORTH
CAROLINA, COULD THAT SET A
PRECEDENT FOR OTHER STATES?
>> WELL, IT COULD.
I-- I THINK YOU'RE PROBABLY
RIGHT THAT THIS WOULD BE UPHELD
AS LEGAL, BUT YOU'RE EXACTLY
RIGHT TO SORT OF CALL ATTENTION
TO THIS.
WHAT OTHER STATES DO WILL BE
IMPORTANT.
IS NORTH CAROLINA GOING TO BE AN
EXAMPLE OF SOMETHING TO FOLLOW?
OR IS IT GOING TO BE AN EXAMPLE
OF SOMETHING TO AVOID?
>> Stewart: MICHAEL GERHARDT
FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF NORTH
CAROLINA, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Stewart: TODAY MARKS TWO
YEARS OF U.S. DETENTE WITH CUBA,
THE DAY WHEN PRESIDENT OBAMA
BEGAN THE PROCESS OF RESTORING
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH A
NATION OF 11 MILLION PEOPLE WHO
LIVE 90 MILES FROM FLORIDA.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT AMY GUTTMAN
REPORTS THE POLICY CHANGE HAS
LED TO A SURGE OF AMERICANS
VISITING CUBA, AND MANY ARE
USING A FAMILIAR ONLINE PLATFORM
TO FIND ACCOMMODATIONS.
>> Reporter: SINCE THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT EASED RESTRICTIONS ON
TRAVEL TO CUBA EARLY LAST YEAR,
THE NUMBER OF AMERICAN TOURISTS
VISITING THE CARIBBEAN ISLAND
NATION HAS SOARED.
ABOUT 230,000 WENT TO CUBA IN
THE FIRST 11 MONTHS OF THIS
YEAR, ROUGHLY 2.5 TIMES THE
NUMBER IN 2014, WHEN THE PROCESS
OF NORMALIZING RELATIONS BEGAN.
TODAY, EIGHT U.S. AIRLINES ARE
APPROVED TO RUN 20 ROUND-TRIP
FLIGHTS DAILY FROM AROUND THE
COUNTRY TO CUBA'S CAPITAL,
HAVANA.
HOWEVER, CUBA'S HOSPITALITY
INDUSTRY HAS A LOT OF CATCHING
UP TO DO.
WITH FEW EXCEPTIONS, HOTELS ARE
EITHER ABANDONED OR FROZEN IN
TIME, JUST LIKE THE AMERICAN
CARS THAT ROLL THROUGH THE
STREETS OF HAVANA NEARLY 60
YEARS SINCE FIDEL CASTRO'S
COMMUNIST REVOLUTION FORCED OUT
PRIVATELY-OWNED BUSINESSES.
ALONG HAVANA'S STORIED SEASIDE
BOULEVARD KNOWN AS THE MALECON,
STATE-OWNED PROPERTIES LIKE THE
HOTEL NACIONAL DE CUBA, FAMOUS
FOR HAVING HOSTED AMERICAN
PRESIDENTS AND HOLLYWOOD STARS,
DON'T HAVE ENOUGH CAPACITY.
THERE ARE CURRENTLY 63,000 HOTEL
ROOMS IN ALL OF CUBA, AND FAR
FEWER UP-TO-DATE, QUALITY HOTELS
THAN ARE NEEDED TO ACCOMMODATE
WHAT IS APPROACHING FOUR MILLION
INTERNATIONAL VISITORS A YEAR.
SINCE 2014, THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT
HAS RELAXED RULES ON FOREIGN
OWNERSHIP OF HOTELS.
IT'S NOW ALLOWING INTERNATIONAL
CHAINS TO BUILD, REMODEL AND
MANAGE HOTELS AS LONG AS THEY
PARTNER WITH STATE-OWNED CUBAN
TOURISM COMPANIES.
FRANCE'S SOFITEL, SWITZERLAND'S
KEMPINSKI AND THE AMERICAN-OWNED
STARWOOD GROUP ARE AMONG THOSE
REFURBISHING AND CONSTRUCTING
FOUR- AND FIVE-STAR HOTELS IN
HAVANA.
STARWOOD, RECENTLY BOUGHT BY
MARRIOTT, HAS ALREADY TAKEN OVER
MANAGEMENT OF THE FIFTH AVENUE
HOTEL, NOW REBRANDED AS FOUR
POINTS, AND IT'S RENOVATING A
19th CENTURY HAVANA LANDMARK,
THE INGLATERRA.
THOUGH THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT HAS
ANNOUNCED PLANS TO DOUBLE THE
ISLAND'S HOTEL CAPACITY BY 2020,
THE CURRENT SHORTAGE OF ROOMS IS
A BOON FOR ANOTHER AMERICAN-RUN
COMPANY, AIRBNB.
THE ONLINE PLATFORM FOR HOMESTAY
BOOKINGS HAS LISTINGS IN MORE
THAN 100 COUNTRIES, BUT IT SAYS
CUBA HAS BECOME ITS FASTEST
GROWING MARKET AS MEASURED BY
LISTINGS.
>> WE ESTIMATE NOW THAT 20% OF
ALL AMERICANS THAT ARE STAYING
IN CUBA ARE STAYING IN A HOME
WITH A CUBA HOST.
>> Reporter: AIRBNB C.E.O. BRIAN
CHESKY ACCOMPANIED PRESIDENT
OBAMA IN MARCH ON HIS HISTORIC
TRIP TO CUBA, THE FIRST BY A
SITTING U.S. PRESIDENT IN NEARLY
80 YEARS.
CHESKY SAYS AMERICANS FROM ALL
50 STATES HAVE USED AIRBNB IN
CUBA SINCE IT BEGAN OPERATING
HERE A YEAR AND HALF AGO.
HE CALLS THIS "PEOPLE-TO-PEOPLE
DIPLOMACY."
>> THERE ARE HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF FRIENDSHIPS THAT
ARE POSSIBLE IF YOU BRING PEOPLE
TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE THIRD
TIME SAN FRANCISCO ENTREPRENEUR
MADELYN MARKOE HAS STAYED AT THE
HOME OF CUBAN HOST FANNY ACOSTA.
>> IT IS VERY DIFFERENT.
IT REALLY FEELS LIKE YOU ARE IN
SOMEONE'S HOME.
A LOT OF TIMES, AIRBNB IN OTHER
PLACES, YOU KNOW, IT CAN FEEL
VERY MUCH LIKE YOU ARE JUST
RENTING AN APARTMENT.
IN CUBA, IT IS A FULL EXPERIENCE
FROM START TO FINISH.
>> Reporter: ACOSTA AND HER
HUSBAND, REDDY, LIST THREE
BEDROOMS IN THEIR FOUR BEDROOM
APARTMENT ON AIRBNB.
IN ADDITION TO SPANISH, SHE
SPEAKS FRENCH, ITALIAN, MANDARIN
AND ENGLISH.
>> THIS IS MY WAY TO LEARN ABOUT
THE REST OF THE WORLD.
I DON'T HAVE TO GO OUT; THE
PEOPLE AND THE WORLD, THEY COME
TO ME.
AND WE HAVE VERY, VERY, VERY
GOOD FRIENDS FROM ALL OVER THE
WORLD.
>> Reporter: THE CONCEPT OF
AIRBNB IS NOT EXACTLY NEW HERE.
EVEN WHEN FIDEL CASTRO WAS
PRESIDENT, CUBANS WERE PERMITTED
TO LIST ROOMS IN THEIR HOMES ON
THE INTERNET AND RENT THEM TO
FOREIGN TOURISTS.
SINCE 1997, CUBANS HAVE BEEN
ALLOWED TO SUPPLEMENT THEIR
INCOME THROUGHCASA
PARTICULARES,OR PRIVATE
HOUSES.
A SYMBOL OF AN UPSIDE-DOWN
ANCHOR NEAR THE DOORWAY
INDICATES HOMES THAT ARE
LICENSED BY THE GOVERNMENT TO
RENT ROOMS.
20,000 HOMES ARE REGISTERED;
10,000 OF THEM ARE NOW LISTED ON
AIRBNB.
LIKE ALL HOSTS, ACOSTA PAYS
TAXES ON THE INCOME EARNED.
HAS BUSINESS CHANGED SINCE THE
ARRIVAL OF AIRBNB?
>> YES, 100%.
NOW, WE TRY TO KEEP OUR ROOMS
AVAILABLE JUST FOR THE AIRBNB
REQUESTS.
THIS IS OUR WAY TO KNOW THEY
WILL ARRIVE FOR SURE.
IF THEY DECIDE TO CHANGE, I KNOW
IN ADVANCE, SO I CAN UPDATE THE
CALENDAR AGAIN.
>> Reporter: HOW BUSY ARE YOU?
>> WE ARE FULL ALMOST THE WHOLE
YEAR BECAUSE THEY READ ABOUT US.
BEFORE AIRBNB, IT'S NOT
POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: SO, YOU GET
FINANCIAL SECURITY?
>> YES.
I'M ALSO LEARNING HOW TO BE A
BUSINESSWOMAN.
>> Reporter: A BUSINESS THAT
PAYS WELL FOR CUBA.
ACOSTA AND HER HUSBAND POCKET
ABOUT $250 PER BOOKING AFTER
PAYING AIRBNB'S FEES.
THAT'S MORE THAN THE $200
AVERAGE MONTHLY SALARY IN CUBA.
THE INCOME HELPED HER PAY BACK
THE LOAN FROM A FRIEND SHE USED
TO BUY THE APARTMENT THREE YEARS
AGO.
TO MAXIMIZE THEIR EARNINGS, SHE
AND HER HUSBAND SHARE THEIR
FOURTH BEDROOM WITH THEIR TWO
SMALL CHILDREN.
SO, THIS IS QUITE A SACRIFICE?
>> I DO IT WITH PLEASURE.
I THINK EVERYTHING IN LIFE IS
SACRIFICE.
>> Reporter: WITH INCOME FROM
GUESTS AND HIGH DEMAND,
BUILDINGS LIKE THESE THAT HAVE
BEEN LEFT DERELICT FOR YEARS ARE
NOW BEING REPAIRED FOR THE
RENTAL INCOME.
ACOSTA AND OTHER CUBANS ARE
INVESTING IN RENOVATIONS AND
REMODELING TO ACCOMMODATE
GUESTS.
WHAT WILL YOU DO WITH THIS MONEY
NOW THAT IT'S YOURS?
>> WE ARE GOING TO FIX THE
ELEVATOR.
>> Reporter: IT MAY BE
SURPRISING THAT AIRBNB CAN
THRIVE IN CUBA, WHERE THE
COMMUNIST REGIME HAS BANNED
INTERNET ACCESS FROM HOME,
EXCEPT FOR GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
OR EMPLOYEES OF FOREIGN
COMPANIES.
CUBA IS NOW INSTALLING ITS FIRST
RESIDENTIAL BROADBAND SERVICE,
WIRING 2,000 HOMES.
AND JUST THIS WEEK, THE
GOVERNMENT SIGNED A DEAL WITH
U.S. TECH GIANT GOOGLE TO PLACE
ITS SERVERS ON THE ISLAND.
UNIVERSITIES AND OFFICES ARE
EQUIPPED WITH INTERNET ACCESS
FOR THEIR EMPLOYEES, BUT OTHER
CUBANS MUST PAY TO GET ONLINE AT
HOTELS AND IN WI-FI ZONES IN
PUBLIC PARKS.
WITHOUT ONLINE SERVICE AT HOME,
AIRBNB HOSTS HAVE COME UP WITH
WORKAROUNDS.
FANNY ACOSTA WALKS A FEW BLOCKS
TO THE NEAREST HOTEL SEVERAL
TIMES A DAY AND PAYS TO GET
ONLINE.
UNIVERSITY OF HAVANA ECONOMICS
PROFESSOR PATRICIA RAMOS RENTS
OUT ROOMS IN HER HOME AND TUTORS
FRIENDS AND FAMILY, HELPING THEM
CREATE A PROFILE OF THEIR
PROPERTIES AND MANAGE BOOKINGS.
>> Reporter: SOON, RAMOS, ACOSTA
AND OTHERS MAY BE LEARNING HOW
TO USE ANOTHER AMERICAN TRAVEL
SITE: TRIPADVISOR.
THE COMPANY IS NOW TAKING
BOOKINGS FOR HOMESTAYS, HOTELS
AND FLIGHTS TO CUBA AFTER
WINNING APPROVAL FROM THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT LAST MONTH.
EVEN AS MULTINATIONAL CHAINS ARE
BUILDING HOTELS, ACOSTA BELIEVES
THERE WILL ALWAYS BE A MARKET
FOR THE PERSONAL SERVICE AND
CULTURAL EXCHANGE THAT HOMESTAYS
PROVIDE.
>> THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE THAT
FEEL REALLY GOOD IN ACASA.
AND THIS IS WHAT I ENJOY, THE
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO STAY IN A
CASAAND BE PART OF OUR FAMILY.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: IN TURKEY TODAY, A
CAR BOMB KILLED 13 SOLDIERS AND
WOUNDED 56 OTHER PEOPLE IN THE
COUNTRY'S ANATOLIA REGION.
IT WAS AN AMBUSH OF A BUS
CARRYING SOLDIERS ON WEEKEND
LEAVE.
TURKISH PRESIDENT ERDOGAN BLAMED
SEPARATIST KURDISH MILITANTS FOR
THE ATTACK NEAR A UNIVERSITY
CAMPUS.
TURKISH POLICE QUICKLY ARRESTED
SEVEN PEOPLE IN CONNECTION WITH
THE ATTACK AND WERE SEEKING FIVE
OTHER SUSPECTS.
THIS FOLLOWS LAST WEEKEND'S
DEADLY TWIN BOMBINGS IN ISTANBUL
THAT TARGETED TURKISH POLICE,
KILLING 44 PEOPLE AND WOUNDING
MORE THAN 150.
THEIR PATH THROUGH TURKEY
LARGELY BLOCKED THIS YEAR, THE
FLOW OF SYRIAN REFUGEES, AS WELL
AS IRAQIS AND AFGHANS, TO EUROPE
HAS SLOWED SIGNIFICANTLY.
HEAD OF THE EUROPEAN UNION
BORDER CONTROL AGENCY FRONTEX
SAID TODAY 350,000 REFUGEES AND
MIGRANTS HAVE ENTERED EUROPE
THIS YEAR, DOWN FROM A MILLION
LAST YEAR.
ABOUT HALF CROSSED THE
MEDITERRANEAN FROM TURKEY,
MAINLY ARRIVING IN GREECE, AND
HALF LEFT FROM NORTHERN AFRICA,
MAINLY ARRIVING IN ITALY.
MORE THAN 4,800 MIGRANTS DIED
TRYING TO MAKE THAT JOURNEY,
ACCORDING TO THE INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATION OF MIGRATION.
CHINA HAS ISSUED A RED ALERT FOR
THE NEXT FIVE DAYS BECAUSE OF
INTENSE SMOG ACROSS BEIJING AND
MORE THAN 20 OTHER CITIES.
DUE TO SMOG ALREADY BLANKETING
THE CAPITAL, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
BANNED HALF OF ALL CARS AND
TRUCKS FROM DRIVING, AND ORDERED
HUNDREDS OF FACTORIES TO SUSPEND
OPERATIONS.
SCHOOLS ARE CLOSED, AND
BEIJING'S 22 MILLION RESIDENTS
ARE URGED TO STAY INDOORS.
GOVERNMENT INSPECTORS ARE MAKING
SURE POWER PLANTS LOWER THE
COAL-FIRED EMISSIONS BY ONE
THIRD.
ABOUT ONE-NINTH OF MAINLAND
CHINA'S TERRITORY IS AFFECTED.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SUNDAY,
HOW DEFECTORS LIVING IN SOUTH
KOREA ARE USING AMERICAN
TELEVISION SHOWS TO UNDERMINE
THE REGIME IN NORTH KOREA.
>> (translated): IF WE FIND
THAT A TELEVISION DRAMA THAT WE
SENT HAS BEEN BANNED, WE KNOW
THAT IT HAS BEEN IMPACTFUL.
>> Stewart: A PUBLIC FUNERAL
SERVICE WAS HELD TODAY IN
COLUMBUS, OHIO, FOR ASTRONAUT
AND SENATOR JOHN GLENN, THE
FIRST AMERICAN TO ORBIT THE
EARTH.
VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN SAID
GLENN, WHO DIED DECEMBER 8,
DEFINED WHAT IT MEANT TO BE AN
AMERICAN.
AND FINALLY, THE DOCTOR WHO
INVENTED THE MANEUVER THAT CAN
SAVE YOU FROM CHOKING HAS DIED.
SURGEON HENRY HEIMLICH DIED
TODAY IN A CINCINNATI HOSPITAL
AFTER SUFFERING A HEART ATTACK
EARLIER THIS WEEK.
HE WAS 96.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.